So, are we waiting for Neil, or is he okay?
But he can hear us? No, uh, sorry,
Neil, can you hear us?
Neil? We can't see. We can't see you, Neil.
Uh, but if you can hear us, just give us a sound.
No,
we're just waiting for Neil.
Can you guys see
Him? Nothing
on, he should be able to unmute
My Okay. Just need
to see. Um, Neil is, it's possible
that you are on mute.
Oh, there you go. Yep. I can see you're on mute.
There you go. Excellent. Welcome. Hello. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, welcome everyone. Uh, my name is Greg Fleming.
I'm the Deputy chair of the Positions Committee.
I'm chairing today in the absence of our chair.
So we'll just, um, get the, uh, my other committee members
to quickly introduce, introduce themselves.
I'm my, I'm Paula Garcia. I'm National MP for New Lynn.
I'm Janti representing Labor here today.
Kda. I'm Kata. I'm from the Green Party list.
And, um, hi Juliana. Um, and I'm based in Christchurch.
Hey, well, thank you very much
for all of you being here today.
We also have sitting at the, um, other end of the table,
which is where, if you guys were in here
in person, you'd be sitting.
We've got the, um, from Phi Kaha, we've got Helen Walter
and Rebecca Alvy.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so they'll be presenting after you guys.
Uh, and, uh, we've, we've found
with the way the petitions committee rolls is that, um,
it's, it's easier sometimes to have,
have a bit of a group conversation.
Uh, 'cause everyone is here to, um,
to genuinely hear your issue,
rather than it being an adversarial nature, which, uh,
which can be sent in some context.
So, um, thank you very much for what you have submitted.
You could take your written submissions
as thoroughly read by us.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes for you guys to present now up
to you as to how you want to use it.
Um, but I would encourage you to leave as much time
as possible at the end of your presentation so
that we can engage with questions over to you.
Can I call to, and thank you so much for the opportunity
to speak, call Juliana,
and my signed name is the J Row.
I'm here on behalf of Access Matters Trust.
As a lead petitioner, as you know, new, new Jarvis and Dr.
Claire Flemer, who are subject experts
in access matter supporters are also speaking today.
And we are here to call for really courageous,
a bold bill that can make disability rights in New Zealand.
Um, I, I, I hope you understand
that accessibility is a pre condition for the fulfillment
of like basic humanized debt.
Many of you take for granted when you have an impairment.
And here in Otero, one in six people,
around 900,000 people have a disability.
And every day, every day we face barriers at schools,
public spaces in online at work.
And accessibility is not just a disability. Sure.
It, it benefits everyone.
We know that parents and friends
and seniors, children, tourists,
and anyone with a temporary injury.
And yet we continue to design systems that exclude.
And, and this exclusion comes at a really personal cost,
but it also cost our economy billions in lost potential.
So, I don't want to repeat myself,
but what we need is a comprehensive legislation in co-design
with disabled people, aka Maori funnel
and the deaf community.
And we need, and this is, it's already written, we just kind
of need to copy and paste.
We need to translate the UN CRPD
into domestic legislation
and make accessibility a legal right
with enforceable standards.
We did an independent oversight, um, body to monitor
and enforce compliance, a way
that people can notify when they face barriers in a free
dispute resolution process.
Process. And of course, we need a national campaign
to raise awareness and to shift societal attitudes.
And I will pass now to Dr.
Claire Flemer, and then Neil will speak
and then we can address any questions
that the committee might have for us.
Thank you, Dr. Claire. To you,
Bye. Thank you. I'm
Claire Flemer from Matthew University School
of Built Environment, doing research onto the accessibility
of buildings for people with disability.
The current NZS 4 1 2, 1 is 23 years old,
and it urgency needs revision reflecting universal
design principles.
I have five brief points to make on this one.
We have to stop thinking that disability is something
that happens to a small group of people in New Zealand.
It will affect every one of us.
That means you, me, a friend, a family member at some point,
either through a medical condition and accident
or as we age.
So it's really important we view this as a whole
of New Zealand issue.
Point two, who's going to pay for improved accessibility?
The answer is every taxpayer
with a social program like the New Zealand pensions,
because that's the only way to spread the cost fairly
amongst everyone.
With government subsidies for accessible features,
we will achieve better building access
for people with disabilities.
Point three, how do we go forward
and what are the priorities?
We've surveyed New Zealand people with many different types
of disabilities, and they've told us exactly which buildings
are the hardest to access
and what are the worst accessibility problems.
So we can provide a clear list of priorities
for improvement, recognizing that we can't fix everything,
but we've got to make a start.
Point four, how do we monitor
and enforce inclusive access for public buildings?
We add the accessible features to the building,
warranted fitness, the bwo
alongside other critical systems like the
fire safety systems.
The building then has annual inspections
and fine for non-compliance.
Finally, we don't expect our pensioners to demonstrate
that they are worthy of receiving a pension.
And in the same way, we shouldn't expect our people
with disabilities to prove that they are worthy of being
included in society.
They deserve the same quality of life as everyone else.
They should be able to participate in society
and not be stuck at home alone and depressed
because they can't access buildings.
Thank you.
And my name is, uh, Neil Jaris. And Kiara, everybody.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak to you all.
Um, I just want to make a couple of brief points as well
that really, uh, come to the question of
why this really matters to, to us.
And I'm gonna focus on the area that I know well.
I work in the field of digital accessibility, access
to information, that kind of thing.
And there, there are a couple of very real examples
that I have experienced
and that would be echoed many, many times
by people in our community.
Uh, so they're not just ones that affect me.
I remember when, um, I was coming back to new,
to New Zealand in 2022.
It was that brief period
that year when the borders were, were open.
And, um, I was coming back to New Zealand
and I was minutes away from being unable to board my flight.
Not because of anything I had done, not
'cause I was late to the airport, but
because the health declaration that we quite rightly had
to fill in at that time, uh, in order to, to be able
to reenter the country, was totally inaccessible to me.
Mm-hmm. Whether that was on the website
or on my mobile phone.
Now that was unforgivable,
especially since it was a government department
that was supposed to be, uh, uh, driven
by the web accessibility guidelines that already existed.
Flash forward to today, that still continues.
Um, you can now come home to New Zealand and,
and fill out an online declaration form, uh,
rather than the old paper one
that, that we are used to doing.
But if you do that, you can only do that on
the, on the website.
If you are a screen reader, user like myself, um,
you cannot use the app even though the app
is available to everybody else.
It's inaccessible. It's a government
department, it's not right.
And I suspect that the reason for that is
that the current web accessibility guidelines
that the government, um, is we trying to enforce, uh, only,
uh, refer to, uh, websites.
They don't refer to mobile apps,
but how many of us rely on mobile apps these days rather
than websites?
And lastly, I would say, uh,
this is echoed throughout society,
not just government departments,
but um, local government as well.
And, uh, and the private sector.
And so even with the improved web accessibility standards
that currently are, are being introduced, it's not enough.
'cause they only apply to central government.
They don't apply to the rest of the economy.
And that's a real problem. So the problems
that we are having are as a result of the failure of
the noble effort to try
and persuade people to do the right thing.
And that is why we need legislation.
And we're happy to take any
questions that people might have.
Thank you very much. All of you over
to questions the government.
Um, did I think under the labor government have an
accessibility bill, um, that was being progressed,
which has been stopped.
And whether you see that it's good or bad, um, it has been.
So there is an opportunity here for the government
to take another look at those accessibility standards.
Um, what you've given us some really clear guidance
as to what could be included in that.
Do you see that as one bill
or do you see that as multiple, um, you know,
in the buildings act and then maybe within
kind of order as well?
I think there's the opportunity to actually do a,
throughout consultation with the community
and engage with, um, the, the people in Parliament
to actually drop the bills
to find out will be the best outcome.
Right now, there will be amendments, um, that could improve
existing legislation, but our prefer, our preference will be
to have an overarching bill that is rights based,
with a rights based approach
that guarantee the articles in the UN CRPD
into disability rights in New Zealand.
It has to some, it has to be something that
will prevent any further legislation to be created, um,
that will generate barriers.
Because the problem is that we, at the moment,
we are constantly putting actually public money
into barriers that later need to be retrofitted.
And that cost way more money.
So if we start doing things, uh, right from the start,
it will benefit everyone.
And another another point that I wanted to make is around,
I know that in, in, in the mind of politicians, um,
and a lot of other people comes like,
but what is the cost of making things accessible?
I ask you to make a reflection
and ask, what is the cost of exclusion?
Because it costs so much to keep this,
this status quo right now, not only in money,
but also human potential.
And I've seen in other countries where you have
legislation pushing for change and it's a win win win.
It creates new business opportunities.
It actually creates a new industry, the industry
of accessibility, it drives innovation
and allows people who will not consumers
or could not work to actually engage in all
those parts of society.
Okay. Thank you very much, Juliana.
That is an excellent, um, opportunity, I think to
with our 10 minutes as well.
And just where you've taken the, the discussion.
If we then pivot to Fire Kaha now, um,
likewise, you guys have 10 minutes.
Um, and same, um, context.
You can take your excellent written, um, submission
as fully read, uh, 10 minutes.
Um, now in your case, at the end of this, we,
we have allowed five minutes for, uh,
a more ranging discussion.
So if, um, for those of you who are, uh, on online
and you, uh, you are able to stay, please do so.
Listen to what say.
And, uh, we, we may be able to have some, um, some,
some cross questions and discussions at the end of this.
So over to you guys. Thank
You. Uh,
I'm Rebecca Alvi, uh, DCE Outreach
and Innovation at the Ministry of Disabled People, Phi Kaha.
Uh, my sign name is, which I think is referenced
to my red here, um, with me is Helen Walter,
who is the group manager of policy
and our policy and insights group.
Thank you to the committee for inviting FHA
to present on these two petitions.
Improving accessibility
for Disabled New Zealanders is a key focus for F kaha.
Last year, the Minister for Disability Issues,
minister Upton decided not to go forward
with the accessibility for New Zealanders bill.
The minister considered that the bill as drafted was not fit
for purpose, and that while legislation can be an enabling
factor, the most effective means
of improving accessibility are likely
to be non-GI legislative.
Instead of progressing legislation,
the minister asked fa Kaha
to develop an accessibility work program
to make tangible improvements
to accessibility in New Zealand.
This work program is based on the idea that most people
and most organizations either want
to do the right thing in terms of accessibility
but don't know how, or they're not aware of the ways that
what they are doing is creating barriers for disabled people
to access or participate.
The work program consists of a mix of shorter
and longer term initiatives focused on raising awareness
and making it easy for people
and society to do the right thing with regards
to access for disabled people.
The work program is structured around four key areas
where accessibility can be improved, the built environment.
And I'm really happy to let those online know that we've
recently agreed that there will be a review
of NZS 4 1 21 in the, um, near future, uh,
digital and information accessibility, transport
and emergency management and response.
There's also another category for initiatives
that don't naturally fit within these, uh, such
as guide dogs, which can span built environment
and transport.
We're also working with community representatives,
including some people on this call, uh,
to establish an advisory group to help f kaha
with the identification, prioritization
and delivery of these initiatives.
Alongside this, f kaha is leading a nu a number
of other activities that will improve accessibility.
We are currently refreshing the New Zealand disability
strategy with input from the disability community.
The five priority outcome areas
of the refresh strategy are education, employment, health,
housing, and justice.
Accessibility is a key issue which runs throughout all
of those outcome areas.
The working groups for each outcome area include officials,
community members, and industry representatives.
Many working group members have expert knowledge on some
of the key accessibility issues in those areas.
F kaha is also refreshing the accessibility charter.
This is an all of government commitment
to work progressively to ensure all public information is
accessible and that disabled people can interact
with government services in ways that meet their needs.
When F Kaha was established
as a new standalone ministry in December last year,
we took on responsibility for the government provision
of information in alternate formats.
FHA is currently stabilizing
and enhancing the alternate format
service and collaborating.
Collaborating with the Department of Internal Affairs
to make improvements in digital accessibility as well
as we accessibility, FHA is committed
to supporting disabled people
to be involved in government decision making.
We facilitate opportunities for disabled people, t Maori
and their whanau to contribute to key areas
of work across government in a number of ways.
We fund the Disabled People's Organization's Coalition
and its role as a member
of the independent monitoring mechanism or IMM
and the IMM promotes protects
and monitors the implementation
of the United Nations Convention on the rights
of Persons with disabilities.
The DPO Coalition is a powerful voice
for disabled people across government.
FAHA is also supported by a strategic advisory group
with membership from across a broad range
of disability organizations, including some
that are not members of the DPO Coalition.
This advisory group is intended to challenge our thinking,
help us identify ways, uh, areas for improvement,
and to create ways for diverse disabled voices,
including those of family whanau and carers to be heard.
The refresh of the New Zealand Disability Strategy,
which we mentioned earlier,
is being undertaken in collaboration with working groups
that include members of the disability community.
The wider disability community will be consulted on the
draft strategy within the coming months,
and we welcome feedback from disabled people.
We also administer a nominations database which collects
expressions of interest from disabled people who
with relevant skills and experience.
So they can be considered for nominations
for relevant governance and advisory positions on state
sector boards and committees.
We are also working with the Public Service Commission on a
four point plan that will support the creation
of employment opportunities within the public
service for disabled people.
This can support more disabled people being included in
government decision making processes.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Just have one clarifying question
just came from the written submissions.
Uh, it's from the petitioner, I believe, um, saying
that one in six New Zealanders, um, carry disability.
Is that correct? Can I just ask
what the definition of that is?
So the, um, data from which
that is obtained is a stats NZ survey,
the disability survey, and it asks a series
of questions about areas of daily life,
which within which people have some form of impairment.
Right. And it identified approximately 850,000 New
Zealanders, uh, meet the conditions within those questions.
Okay. Right. Thank you very much. Other questions?
I'm interested to understand.
Um, I think this work is amazing.
Firstly, really, um, advocate
for nothing about us without us
and having meaningful, um, participation
and governance with, um, people with lived experience.
And I know itself has, um, a, a larger percentage
of people who identify
as being disabled than most government departments to,
um, to do this.
So that's cool.
I'm still, um, trying to understand
why we wouldn't legislate for something like,
I think it was a hundred percent of KAA order homes
to be accessible.
Um, or 90%. A hundred percent.
Um, because if it's in legislation, then it has to happen.
And, um, in Christchurch, I have a constituent,
and I have his permission to talk about this,
he lives in a KAA order home.
He was institutionalized because the home wasn't accessible.
He fell and he's, he is in his young twenties
and was looking at a life of institutionalization
and an old folks home at 20 years old even though he wanted
to live independently.
Um, and if his, if his home was accessible, then
that wouldn't have happened
and he would still be feeling safe in his
own home and community.
So yeah. What, what is the rationale?
A a around not legislating for it, do
You? Yeah,
thanks. So I guess it's really about, um, uh,
I guess there's a couple of points I'd make.
One is that, um, to enable that kind of thing,
you need funding and you need, um, I guess to me,
those decisions really sit with the government of the day,
um, rather than necessarily being something that is
set in legislation, um, by parliament.
'cause they do require, you know, ongoing commitments
of funding and, uh, prioritization
of things on the work program.
And that's the kind of thing that, um,
I guess the government of the day makes decisions on, um,
juggling a lot of priorities
and working within a number of constraints.
Um, I suppose the other point is that, um, uh,
legislation is not needed
to enable something like that to happen.
Um, so, uh, I guess, um, the
point that, that I've come back to often in working on this
is that, uh, sometimes even though you might have something
enshrined in legislation, it's actually still very difficult
to make it a reality.
Mm-hmm. And I guess what we're doing
with this work is trying to focus on the other stuff
that needs to be in place to, um, uh,
enable improvements
to accessibility like Rebecca's outlined.
Okay. Jan, Thanks and lovely to see you, Helen.
Um, I just really want to sub on that, is
that the accessibility bill,
and I note that the minister said that the majority
of submitters, uh, did not want agree with it,
but it wasn't that they didn't want a bill.
My understanding is that it didn't go far enough
for the majority of submitters and
or they wanted, they absolutely wanted a bill.
So why was the rationale to like, take it away completely
and not put it back to the drawing board
and make that bill a stronger proposition so
that they could even take it back to work
with disability groups, um, to make it stronger
and to give it more weight and more leaks, so to speak?
Well, I mean the, um, the submitters
on the whole wanted quite significant change to the bill.
Um, so I guess that's the, the kind
of a procedural issue there.
But I think what the minister articulated
as her rationale was that, um,
she felt it was better to take a step back from legislation
as the way to bring about change
and try to focus on more concrete,
tangible steps that could be taken.
And that's what she's asked us.
Can I just second on that?
So that being the case, in your opinion with the groups
that you work with, is that enough?
Because it seems to me that there's still this desire
to see themselves represented in legislation that's going
to be enabling legislation.
Because from what I can see and, and read
and talk to, and just like Juliana said,
I've got personal experience here as well, is that, that
not having it in legislation does not go far enough.
'cause it can become a tick box exercise
unless you start making things compulsory,
it, it can get overseen.
So in your opinion, with the groups that you are working
with, where do you see this going?
Is there going to be a move towards legislation?
Is what you're doing enough now?
Because it doesn't seem to be that that's the case?
I think it'll be really important
that we evaluate the accessibility work
program, uh, as we go.
And we're designing that into the,
into the work program at the moment.
Um, because I think the untapped opportunities
that don't require legislation
are actually quite significant.
Um, and my own experience tells me most people do want
to do the right thing, and it's often
because they either don't know or they don't know how.
Um, and there are lots of ways that, um,
things can be improved.
I mean, for example, uh,
local councils could be including terms and conditions
and contracts for procurement for road workers to make sure
that footpaths were still accessible
while roadworks were underway.
There's all sorts of things like that,
that are very concrete
and sorry for the pun, uh, tangible
that would make a real difference, um,
that don't require legislation.
They just require people to have a bit of a think about
what is happening at the moment and how it could be changed.
Can I can, I'm sorry to interrupt, but can I just ask
and it is just a clarification,
but they don't have to do they,
so those councils can choose to do that or not?
They would be wrong, in my opinion not to do that.
But the bottom line is, without that guiding legislation,
they don't have to, they can choose not to have that there.
And, and I think in some instances,
even when legislation exists, they can choose not to.
So I suppose what I'm most concerned with is to ensure
that the change happens whether
or not that's in legislation. Hmm.
Um, I would say
If I, I can, can I add something?
Yeah, sure. Yeah. Yeah.
I think there's, um, I think like it's, it's, um,
a political decision right, that sits in parliament.
So we cannot ask public servants to respond why the,
it it hasn't been place.
But the other thing is
what we need is a total change in culture and values.
Mm-hmm. Um, I truly believe that why New Zealand is so far
behind in terms of disability rights, um, is
because we live in a very ableist society.
For some, for some reason, we still think here as a society
that having a disability make you worse off, make you less.
It's quite confronting. But we need to have disco,
courageous conversations.
Why do you think that it's okay that I need to go
through the back door or not get to any place at all?
Because I, I'm in a wheelchair.
Why no one take a stand in this, this is not okay.
Why someone like Neil cannot go online
and make his shopping like everybody else was cited.
And it's just fine, you know?
So we need to kind of why, why being treated not
as equal and less face and it's, it's okay.
It's not okay. I have a dear friend who's
also a disability advocate.
She say that if people without impairments put up
with a third of what we put up every day,
there will be a civil war.
But we prefer non-violent resistance,
prefer engage in, in a, in a positive way.
And, and I truly believe that legislation
with enforceable standards is a tool
to accelerate this societal, uh, cultural shift
that we need, you know, you can see as an affirmative action
that will reduce the gap.
We can, yes, we can wait
and we can relate on the goodwill
of everybody to do the right thing.
Yeah. Right. That's not how, okay.
Sorry, just, I've got one more question from Paula,
and then we're probably gonna need to wrap.
Yes. Just a quick one to Rebecca
and Helen, uh, coral Larry to, uh,
honorable te uh, question.
My question is, does have the working, the community
that you are dealing with in the working groups
that you're dealing with, have they expressed, um, uh,
an understanding of what you're trying to do, which is
to implement what you can now?
Um, and, and are they, what is the feedback?
I I'm, I we probably both have something to add on
that I think many in the community would echo, um, the views
of the petitioners in terms of it, they would prefer both.
We should do all of the things
and we should have legislation.
Um, and, and that's not our role as, as public servants
to ascertain which of those is the right approach.
Okay. Okay. Sure. Can I miss
One comment? Yeah,
yeah. Um, the week
before last, youth MPS were here in parliament
and in this room here, there was a working group
who reported back on their findings.
And I just thought we could, I,
this was one of their findings.
Um, they were so clever and articulate
and I, it was like quite motivating.
We could probably learn something as, uh, mps from the
how prepared these Youth mps were.
But this was one of, um, the findings that they made.
They concluded that quote, support,
if it arrives at all often comes
after long strenuous ba a long strenuous battle quote
and quote, no one should have to exhaust themselves
for basic access.
And this is from young Disabled Youth mps.
And I just thought they were in here saying these
words a few weeks ago.
And that would be a nice place
to, yeah. Thank you, honor them.
Thank you very much, kaing. Okay. We'll wrap it there.
Um, to those of you, to the Petitions online,
thank you very much and to, um, Rebecca
and Helen from, um, thank you very much as well. Well,
Thank you.
Thanks very much.